




Conshohocken, Pennsylvania, March, 2006 – Results from a new study show that Aldara (imiquimod) Cream, 5%, a topical  skin cancer  treatment, improved the structure and appearance of prematurely aged skin, including fine lines, wrinkles, dyspigmentations and texture. The findings, from researchers at S.K.I.N. Incorporated, a dermatology research facility, are presented as a poster this weekend at the 64th Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Dermatology in San Francisco.
   
Aldara Cream is an immune response modifier used to treat precancerous skin lesions called actinic keratoses (AK) as well as superficial basal cell  carcinoma  (sBCC), a nonmelanoma skin cancer. It works by stimulating the body's immune system. AK and sBCC are the result of a lifetime of exposure to ultraviolet rays of the sun. Long-term exposure to the ultraviolet rays of the sun can also cause structural and cosmetic damage to the skin commonly referred to as photodamage. Photodamaged skin is characterized by fine lines and wrinkles, roughness, dryness, lack of firmness and irregular pigmentation.
   
"Our results indicate that Aldara Cream may offer patients cosmetic benefits in addition to its important therapeutic role in treating precancerous and cancerous skin lesions," said Albert Kligman, MD, PhD, Professor Emeritus of Dermatology at the University of Pennsylvania and lead investigator in this study. "We initiated this study after anecdotal finding that some AK patients treated with Aldara Cream reported cosmetic improvements to their skin. Further exploration of the cosmetic uses for Aldara Cream is clearly warranted."
   
The open-label study included ten healthy females with visible signs of photoaging. Volunteers received Aldara Cream five times per week for four weeks. At predetermined intervals, the subjects were evaluated for both visible and microscopic-level changes to the underlying skin structures.
   
According to the results of this small study, treatment with Aldara Cream corrected the structural changes associated with photodamage caused by sun exposure. Additionally, use of Aldara visibly reduced fine lines and wrinkles, improved skin texture and resulted in more uniform skin color. At the end of the study, 80 percent of the subjects rated these improvements as "moderate" or "great." According to subjects' assessments, 90 percent expressed strong approval of the cosmetic benefits. The visible improvement in appearance was also documented by histological study of biopsies. Aldara Cream was well tolerated in the study and no volunteers reported irritation with redness, stinging, or discomfort.
   
###
   
About S.K.I.N. INC. S.K.I.N. INC. is a clinical contract laboratory, which provides state of the art dermatologic services for determining the safety and efficacy of topical drugs, cosmetics, and skin care products. The organization was founded in 1993 by Albert M. Kligman MD, PhD and Tracy Stoudemayer who have worked together for over 30 years doing dermatology research, publishing numerous scientific papers and abstracts, and lecturing at national and international meetings. 
   
Contact: Marianne Stoudemayer, S.K.I.N. INC.  
skininc3@aol.com  
 WeissComm Partners 