




When it comes to talking about suicide, Americans avoid the topic much the same way they skirted discussions about sex 20 years ago. But the president of the American Association of Suicidology says the time is long overdue for people to start talking about the problem and to launch suicide awareness and prevention programs in the nation's schools.
   
James Mazza will challenge the more than 600 people attending the association's 39th annual meeting in Seattle to make suicide "a community and societal issue because no one escapes it."
   
Mazza, a University of Washington associate professor of educational psychology who focuses his research on reducing and preventing suicide, said there is a critical need to initiate suicide awareness and prevention program in the nation's schools. Suicide is currently the third leading cause of death among teenagers and young adults ages 15 to 24, behind traffic accidents and homicide.
   
"Right now we don't do anything that has a  mental health  focus in our schools that is standardized across our state or country. We need to focus on our kids when they are first getting the bumps and bruises of life," he said. "There are no wide-scale school programs on suicide awareness and prevention largely because schools don't have the resources to effectively deal with the at-risk youth they identify. And there are no federally funded resources available for mental health assessment. As a result, schools only focus on having students pass the Washington Assessment of Student Learning or other assessment tests and are ignoring their mental health needs. Education should not be equated to only academics.
   
"We have to have resources dedicated to suicide prevention and awareness in the schools."
   
The problem, however, transcends the schools, Mazza said, noting that it is the second-leading cause of death among adults 65 and older, the age group also has the nation's highest suicide rate. Mazza said members of the organization must work with businesses, colleges and treatment centers, as well as schools, to deal with suicide prevention and awareness across the life span.
   
"There is a major need for assessment for suicide and to intervene with people of all ages who are at risk for suicide."
   
###
   
Contact: Joel Schwarz  
 University of Washington  