




A medication used to treat other types
of  cancer  strangles drug-resistant, metastatic  prostate cancer  by cutting
off its blood supply, researchers from The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center report in the June 7 issue of the Journal of the
National Cancer Institute.    

    Imatinib, known commercially as Gleevec, worked best when combined with
the  chemotherapy  paclitaxel to slash the incidence of bone metastases and
the size of tumors in mice injected with a multiple-drug resistant form of
prostate cancer. Tumors were found in only 4 of 18 mice treated with the
combination, median  tumor  weight was one tenth of a gram, and the cancer
spread to the lymph nodes in three cases. Tumors grew in all 19 control
mice, their median tumor weight was 1.3 grams, and all metastasized to the
lymph nodes.    

    This extremely drug-resistant form of the cancer, designed by the
research team to emulate the grim clinical reality of prostate cancer that
has spread into the bone, successfully warded off the combined medications
in lab experiments, said Isaiah J. Fidler, D.V.M., Ph.D., chair of the
Department of Cancer Biology and director of the Cancer Metastasis Research
Center at M. D. Anderson.    

    \"Why, then, did it work so well in the animal? Because we didn\'t attack
the tumor, we attacked the blood vessels. We target and destroy the
vasculature that provides oxygen and nutrients to tumor cells,\" said
Fidler, the paper\'s senior author.    

    Fidler and colleagues show in the JNCI paper that imatinib killed
tumor- related blood vessel (endothelial) cells by inactivating the
platelet-derived growth factor receptors (PDGF-R) on the cell surface. This
prevents the receptor\'s activation either by PDGF binding to it externally
or by a signal generated internally by the cell.    

    Activation of PDGF-R stimulates the birth of new blood vessels,
promotes cell division and migration, and inhibits a protective form of
cell suicide known as apoptosis, all harmful effects in the service of a
cancer cell.    

    With imatinib preventing activation of PDGF-R, Fidler said, the
endothelial cells died by apoptosis first, with tumor cells following suit
one to two weeks later.    

    Fidler said the findings are a vibrant example of the \"seed and soil\"
hypothesis in metastasis -- the deadly spreading of a cancer from its organ
of origin to other organs, a process that kills 90 percent of all patients
who die from their disease.    

    In landmark findings, Fidler and colleagues demonstrated that the vast
majority of cancer cells that depart a tumor die swiftly once in
circulation and that metastases originate from less than 1 percent of a
cancer\'s cells and even can arise from a single cell.    







    When these metastatic \"seeds\" enter circulation, they still need to
find the exact microenvironment that permits them to grow. For prostate
cancer, the second-leading cause of cancer death among men, that
microenvironment is the bone.    

    Earlier research by Fidler and colleagues showed PDGF-R activation in
metastatic prostate tumors adjacent to the bone but not in tumor cells next
to muscle. PDGF-R also was activated in tumor-associated endothelial cells
in the bone, but not in those blood vessel cells in neighboring muscle.    

    A JNCI paper by Fidler and colleagues in 2003 showed that blocking
PDGF-R signaling in the mouse model of metastatic prostate cancer cut the
incidence of cancer, reduced the size of tumors and incidence of
metastasis.    

    The question was whether the combination of imatinib and paclitaxel
achieved this by attacking the tumor itself or the tumor-related blood
vessels. This week\'s JNCI paper answers that question: it kills the blood
vessels first. \"Here, we attack the soil. The seeds can be resistant. Kill
the endothelial cell, you kill the soil,\" Fidler said.    

    Imatinib had an effect by itself, but the best result came from the
pairing with paclitaxel, known commercially as Taxol, which induces
apoptosis in non-resistant cancer cells. Taxol, developed by the
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., is frontline therapy for prostate cancer but
eventually loses its effect as resistant tumor cells proliferate.    

    Gleevec, developed by Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, is used to
treat chronic myelogenous  leukemia  and gastrointestinal stromal tumors.
    Cancer cells are biologically diverse and genetically unstable, Fidler
says, so it is highly unlikely that a single therapy will prevail,
necessitating a multi-modal attack on the disease.    

    Paul Mathew, M.D., assistant professor, and Christopher Logothetis,
M.D., professor and chair of the Department of Genitourinary Medical
Oncology at M. D. Anderson, are leading a phase II clinical trial employing
imatinib and docetaxel against androgen-independent prostate cancer.
Docetaxel is in the same family of medication as paclitaxel.    

    This research project was funded by a Cancer Center Support Core grant
and a Specialized Programs in Research Excellence (SPORE) grant, both from
the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health. Fidler,
Mathew and Logothetis have research projects that are sponsored by Novartis
Pharmaceuticals.    

    Co-authors of the JNCI paper, all from M. D. Anderson, are: first
author Sun-Jin Kim, M.D., Ph.D.; Hisanori Uehara, M.D., Ph.D.; Sertac
Yazici, M.D.; Joseph Erik Busby, M.D.; Toru Nakamura, M.D., Ph.D.; Junqin
He, M.D.; Marva Maya; Christopher Logothetis, M.D.; Paul Mathew, M.D.;
Xuemei Wang; Kim-Anh Do, Ph.D.; and Dominic Fan, Ph.D.    






University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center   
 http://www.mdanderson.org 