




People who are obese have a 25% higher risk of developing psychiatric disorders, such as  depression ,  bipolar disorder  and panic disorder, say researchers from Group Health Center for Health Studies, USA.    

The study, involving 9,000 people, also found that the link is strongest among Caucasians, people with more education and those with higher incomes - the risk here is 44% higher, when compared to people of normal weight.    

Most research on  obesity  has looked at the physical consequences, such as  heart disease ,  type 2 diabetes ,  arthritis  and  cancer .  This is the first major study to look at an association with psychiatric consequences.    

The study has been published in the  Archives of General Psychiatry , July issue.    

Asked whether depression leads to obesity or the other way round, Dr. Greg Simon, lead author, said "It's almost certain that the association works in both directions. Understanding the connection between obesity and depression is an important public health issue because both of these conditions are so common and have a significant impact on our health care systems."   

It was also found that obese people are 25%  less likely  to have a substance abuse disorder at some time during their lives when compared to people of normal weight.    

The average American has a 30% chance of being obese, said Dr. Simon.  A depressed person, he said, has a 40% chance of becoming obese.    

20% of US people suffer from depression at some time in their lives - the figure is 28% for obese people.    

The research team found that the incidence of depression among obese people was higher in social and cultural groups where obesity is less common.    
 Dr. Simon and team are now carrying out research into:   

-- How difficult is it for depressed people to become more physically active?    

-- Do depressed people have different diets from people who are not depressed?    

--  Are structured weight-loss programmes less successful for a depressed person?    

-- Would it make a difference if weight-loss programmes were designed specifically for depressed people?    
 Link to Group Health Center for Health Studies.   
 Archives of General Psychiatry . 2006;63:824-830.   
 Association Between Obesity and Psychiatric Disorders in the US Adult Population  
 Link to Abstract.  
Authors: Gregory E. Simon, MD, MPH; Michael Von Korff, ScD; Kathleen Saunders, JD; Diana L. Miglioretti, PhD; Paul K. Crane, MD, MPH; Gerald van Belle, PhD; Ronald C. Kessler, PhD   Written by Christian Nordqvist 