




The Swiss pharmaceutical company, Roche, has announced plans to seek a licence to allow prescribing in Europe of its novel  cancer  drug Xeloda? for  stomach cancer .  Xeloda, also known as capecitabine, is an oral  chemotherapy  drug that is activated to a cancer-killing agent called 5-flurouracil (5-FU) within cancer cells themselves. Unlike traditional chemotherapy, which is given as an intravenous infusion and attacks healthy cells as well as cancer cells, Xeloda can be taken at home rather than in hospital and produces less of the severe side effects associated with intravenous chemotherapy such as  diarrhoea ,  fatigue  and vomiting.    
 
The drug is currently available to treat breast and  colorectal cancer . But new data presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) conference last month show that it is at least as effective as current chemotherapy treatments for stomach cancer and dramatically reduced the amount of time patients needed to visit hospital for treatment. Professor Chris Twelves, NTRAC Professor of Clinical Cancer Pharmacology and Oncology at the University of Leeds in the UK, said: ?Compared to the current, standard treatment Xeloda has the additional benefit of reducing that amount of time to only one day, which helps patients to live as normal a life as possible.?    
 
Jonathan Dickinson, Life Cycle Leader - Xeloda, told Medical News Today: ?Roche plans to file in the next month or so for a gastric cancer indication for Xeloda in Europe. The label will be for advanced gastric cancer, because that is what the data at this stage supports. Data in the future may support an indication for early gastric cancer.?    
 
Gastric cancer is the fourth most commonly diagnosed cancer and the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide1. ?For many patients with gastric cancer, the prognosis is poor. New developments in this area are obviously encouraging for patients and their families,? said Jonathan Dickinson.    
 
The study supporting the licence application and presented at ASCO was based on 316 advanced stomach cancer patients. It showed that patients receiving a combination of Xeloda and cisplatin lived at least as long without the cancer progressing as those treated with the standard chemotherapy regime of intravenous 5-FU and cisplatin. The median progression-free survival was 5.6 months in the Xeloda group compared to 5 months in the standard regime group.  
In a second study also presented at ASCO, the largest-ever phase III study in advanced oesophagogastric cancer, the REAL 2 study, revealed that Xeloda can replace 5-FU and oxaliplatin can replace cisplatin for the first-line treatment of patients with advanced oesophagus and stomach cancer.  Standard treatment for oesophagogastric cancer in many countries is the combination of epirubicin, cisplatin and 5-FU.    
 
Professor David Cunningham from the Royal Marsden Hospital in London said: ?Xeloda can now be considered as a treatment option for oesophagogastric cancer, replacing 5-FU, as it provides the optimal balance between efficacy, safety and convenience for patients.?    
 
The REAL 2 study showed that patients treated with the combination of Xeloda plus oxaliplatin and epirubicin lived significantly longer, compared to patients treated with the standard chemotherapy regime. In this study, 1,002 advanced oesophagogastric cancer patients were treated with one of four regimes to compare the effect on overall survival between Xeloda and 5-FU and the oxaliplatin and cisplatin-containing arms. Patients in the Xeloda-containing arms lived at least as long as those on the 5-FU arms. Patients in the Xeloda plus oxaliplatin and epirubicin group had an overall longer survival than patients in any of the other treatment groups (11.2 months versus 9.3 months and 9.9 months).    
 
Xeloda, already licensed in 90 countries worldwide, has been shown to be effective, safe, simple and convenient oral chemotherapy. Roche received marketing authorisation for Xeloda as first-line monotherapy in the treatment of metastatic colorectal caner in most countries in 2001. It has also been approved by the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) and U.S Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for adjuvant (post-surgery) treatment of  colon cancer  in March and June 2005, respectively.    
 
Xeloda is licensed in combination with Taxotere? (docetaxel) in women with metastatic  breast cancer  and whose disease has progressed following intravenous chemotherapy with anthracyclines. Xeloda monotherapy is also indicated for the treatment of patients with metastatic breast cancer that is resistant to other chemotherapy drugs.    
 
Further data presented at ASCO showed that Xeloda plus paclitaxel was equally effective and safer than the combination of an anthracycline (epirubicin) plus paclitaxel in advanced breast cancer. ?Anthracyclines are an important part of breast cancer therapy but the risk of progressive  heart failure  after receiving a cumulative dose restricts their use. This new study demonstrates that Xeloda combinations can offer patients all the good of anthracyclines without the bad effects,? said lead investigator Dr L?ck from the Horst-Schmidt Clinic, Wiesbaden, Germany.   
 
Dr L?ck's study in 340 metastatic breast cancer patients showed that progression-free survival was 12.3 months in the non-anthracycline Xeloda regimen versus 11.8 months in the anthracycline-containing regimen.    
 
1. Ajani J. Evolving Chemotherapy for Advanced Gastric Cancer.  The Oncologist , Oct 2005; Vol 10, supp 3, 49-58  
2. ASCO 2006. Kang Y, Kang WK, Shin DB, Chen J, Xiong J, Wang J, Lichinitser M, Salas MP, Suarez T, Santamaria J. Abstract LBA4018   
 
Written by: Rhonda Siddall  
Rhonda.Siddall@btinternet.com   
 http://www.roche.com 