 
	The  Los Angeles Unified School District , and potentially several other school districts in Los Angeles County, through the federal  Vaccines for Children Program  plan to offer to female students starting the 2006-2007 school year  Merck \'s human papillomavirus vaccine Gardasil, according to L.A. Unified officials, the  Los Angeles Times  reports (Doan,  Los Angeles Times , 7/24). The Vaccines for Children Program provides no-cost immunizations to children covered by Medicaid, Alaska-native and American Indian children and some uninsured and underinsured children ( Kaiser Daily Women\'s Health Policy Report , 6/30).  FDA  last month  approved  Gardasil for sale and marketing to girls and women ages nine to 26, and  CDC \'s  Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices  later that month voted unanimously to recommend that all girls ages 11 and 12 receive the vaccine ( Kaiser Daily Women\'s Health Policy Report , 7/5). ACIP also recommended that Gardasil be covered by the Vaccines for Children Program ( Kaiser Daily Women\'s Health Policy Report , 6/30). Through the vaccine program, Los Angeles County dispenses 16 approved vaccines at no cost to qualified health care providers, including 22 school districts, 80 not-for-profit community clinics and 44 county health services sites. Karen Maiorca, L.A. Unified\'s former director of nursing services, said the vaccine will be available to all students annually at district-operated health clinics, regardless of their eligibility for the Vaccines for Children program. School districts registered for the Vaccines for Children program -- including L.A. Unified,  Hacienda La Puente Unified School District  and  Azusa Unified School District  -- can decide not to offer the vaccine, the  Times  reports. County and L.A. Unified officials said they have not received resistance to the proposal, but the district\'s plans to distribute the vaccine have not yet been made public, according to the  Times . Los Angeles School Board President Marlene Canter said she understood the concerns of some parents who think the vaccine could promote sexual promiscuity among teenagers. \"But the way I see it is you have a chance to prevent a disease that kills people,\" she said, adding, \"You should look at it as a preventive vaccine that saves lives.\"  Peter Kerndt, director of the county health department\'s sexually transmitted infection program, said he plans to recommend to Los Angeles County supervisors that all teenage females be vaccinated if their parents give permission. Vaccines for Children and Merck are expected to continue cost negotiations for vaccine supplies for at least two more months, and it could be four to six months before the county can distribute the supplies to schools, Kerndt said ( Los Angeles Times , 7/24). 

   \"Reprinted with permission from  http://www.kaisernetwork.org . You can view the entire Kaiser Daily Health Policy Report, search the archives, or sign up for email delivery at  http://www.kaisernetwork.org/dailyreports/healthpolicy . The Kaiser Daily Health Policy Report is published for kaisernetwork.org, a free service of The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation . © 2005 Advisory Board Company and Kaiser Family Foundation. All rights reserved. 