




Nearly 150 basic and clinical scientists will assemble in Boston this week to better understand the role of the  central nervous system  in conditions such as  postpartum depression  and female  anxiety  at the Parental Brain Conference at Boston's Back Bay Hilton. The event begins at 7 p.m. on Thursday, June 7.
   
The four-day event, hosted by Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine at Tufts University faculty member Robert S. Bridges, Ph.D., will bring together some of the leading minds on maladaptive parental response to share state-of-the-art methods and compare findings on several species, including humans. Leading gender biologist David R. Rubinow, M.D., Chair of Psychiatry at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, will deliver the conference's keynote lecture, "Postpartum depression: Context-Dependent Effects of Reproductive Steroids."
   
"Most mammals, including humans, experience postpartum changes in behavior and emotional state, as well as similar maladaptive responses - and yet so little is known about the underlying mechanisms that cause them," said Robert S. Bridges, Ph.D., professor and head of the Section of Reproductive Biology at the Cummings School and host of the conference. "It is our hope in gathering these top minds that we might come closer to understanding parenting."
   
The Parental Brain Conference will include 11 symposia on topics ranging from maternal  stress , anxiety and  depression  to bi-parental care. Conference supporters include National Institutes of Health, Cummings School Dean's Fund, Mother-Infant Conference at Montreal's Douglas Hospital, Tufts University Office of the Vice Provost for Research, University of Richmond, British Society for Neuroendocrinology, Boston College, and The Heinz Family Philanthropies.
   
###
    
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine at Tufts University 
   
Founded in 1978 in North Grafton, Mass., Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine at Tufts University is internationally esteemed for academic programs that impact society and the practice of veterinary medicine; three hospitals that treat more than 28,000 animals each year; and groundbreaking research that benefits animal, public, and environmental health.
   
Contact: Thomas Keppeler
  
 Tufts University, Health Sciences  