




Providing a voice to an often 
silent disease, Epocrates, Inc. surveyed 500 clinicians to identify trends 
in  depression  diagnosis, prevalence and treatment. People dealing with 
 stress , whether in the workplace or at home, should take note; nearly all 
clinicians identified stress as the leading contributor to depression.     


The majority of clinicians reported seeing an increase in depression in 
the past five years, and believe this increase may be driven by greater 
disease awareness, and ultimately more patients seeking help. However, 
clinicians reported that many more patients may be experiencing symptoms 
that are going undiagnosed. More than half of survey respondents felt that 
physicians are hesitant to diagnose depression, primarily due to resistance 
from patients and lack of societal acceptance. Clinicians also reported 
uncertainty about diagnosing depression, as patients may present symptoms 
differently based on gender and ethnicity, or may be a product of another 
medical illness.    

    
"In today's digital age, the increasing pressure to get it done 
yesterday can lead to more stress and potentially depression. Early 
recognition and intervention are important to prevent the loss of jobs, 
damage to relationships or  suicidal thoughts ," said John Luo, MD, Assistant  
Clinical Professor of Psychiatry at UCLA Semel Institute for Neuroscience 
and Human Behavior.    

    
The vast majority of clinicians reported recommending prescription 
therapies for their patients experiencing depression. Beyond 
pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy, 60 percent of respondents believe 
lifestyle changes such as diet, exercise and meditation may also be helpful 
in treating depression, depending on the patient's individual situation.   
 Additional key survey findings include:    

    -- Gender makes a difference when diagnosing depression    

       -- Thirty percent of clinicians reported being less likely to discuss 
          depression with men.    

       -- Clinicians reported it is often more difficult to treat men because 
          they are less "open" than women, and symptoms such as anger or 
           addiction  may not be immediately linked to depression.     

    -- Clinicians may be more likely to experience depression    

       -- More than 50 percent of clinicians reported experiencing depression 
          at some point in their lives, which compared to the National 
          Institutes of Health data, could make them more than twice as likely 
          to experience depression as the general public.    

       -- Additionally, 12 percent of clinicians reported missing work because 
          they felt depressed. Clinicians are not alone-a national study 
          revealed that depression is the leading cause of missed work days, 
          and lost productivity due to depression is estimated at $83 billion 
          a year.    

    
For more about depression, including a podcast with UCLA psychiatrist  
Dr. Luo, clinicians' comments and comprehensive survey results, please 
visit  http://insights.epocrates.com/depression . Comprehensive dosing and 
drug interaction information for anti-depressants can also be found at 
 http://www.epocrates.com .   
 ABOUT EPOCRATES, INC.   
    
San Mateo, Calif.-based Epocrates is transforming the practice of 
medicine by developing innovative solutions that support clinical decisions 
at the point of care. More than 500,000 healthcare professionals, including   
more than one in four U.S. physicians, actively use Epocrates' mobile and 
web-based products to improve patient safety and save time. The company's 
offerings also enable communication between its users and healthcare 
organizations such as government agencies, pharmaceutical manufacturers and 
market research firms. Epocrates has been on the Inc. 500 fastest-growing 
private companies list for two consecutive years -- ranking 176 in 2006. 
For more information about Epocrates, please visit 
 http://www.epocrates.com .    




Epocrates, Inc.  
 http://www.epocrates.com 