




Patients with  depression  treated in two independent health care systems 
experienced overall drops in suicide attempts between the month prior to starting treatment with 
 antidepressant  medications and the month after treatment began.    

The findings are based on records from a large prepaid health plan and from Veterans Health 
Administration databases, reflecting the clinical care of more than 330,000 patients. These two 
studies are reported in the July issue of the  American Journal of Psychiatry (AJP) , the official 
journal of the American Psychiatric Association.    

The first study, "Suicide Attempts Among Patients Starting Depression Treatment with 
Medications or Psychotherapy," is presented by Gregory Simon, M.D., M.P.H., and James 
Savarino, Ph.D., of Group Health Cooperative-a mixed-model prepaid health plan with 
approximately 500,000 members in Washington State and Idaho.    

Among the 109,256 members treated for depression between 1996 and 2005, suicide attempts 
decreased during the first month of treatment and diminished further in subsequent months. This 
progressive decline occurred for both patients taking medication and those receiving 
psychotherapy. About 60 percent of the treatment episodes began with antidepressant 
prescriptions and about 40 percent began with psychotherapy visits.    

The second study, involving veterans, is described in "The Relationship Between Antidepressants 
and Suicide: Results of Analysis of the Veterans Health Administration Datasets," by Robert 
Gibbons, Ph.D., Kwan Hur, Ph.D., J. John Mann, M.D., and colleagues at the University of 
Illinois at Chicago and the New York State Psychiatric Institute. The findings are based on 
226,866 veterans diagnosed with depression during 2003-2004. The analysis, in addition to 
showing a decrease in suicide attempts once treatment began, also revealed a lower rate of suicide 
attempts in depressed veterans who took antidepressants compared to those who did not.    

Selective  serotonin  reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) were the most commonly prescribed 
antidepressants, and the rate of suicide attempts for patients taking SSRIs fell from 221 per 
100,000 patients before treatment, to 123 per 100,000 after treatment began. The rate also fell 
after the beginning of treatment with medications known as non-serotonergic and tricyclic 
antidepressants.    

The positive overall outcomes in the two studies were shared by the youngest patients. The 
adolescents and young adults studied by Simon and Savarino made approximately twice as many 
suicide attempts as the total group, but they showed a similar decline after beginning treatment.    
Gibbons et al. found that all age groups, including 18 to 25 year olds, experienced both a decline 

 

in suicide attempts with treatment and a lower incidence among depressed veterans receiving 
SSRIs, compared to those receiving no antidepressant treatment.    

The authors point out that large-scale studies do not exclude the possibility that depression 
treatment may precipitate suicidal thinking or behavior in vulnerable individuals.    

The findings are reviewed in an editorial by David Brent, M.D., of the University of Pittsburgh.    
 AJP  Editor in Chief Robert Freedman, M.D., stated "These studies of treatment in actual clinical 
practice find a decrease in suicide attempts after treatment, regardless of whether the treatment is 
psychotherapy or drug therapy. Patients and their doctors are concerned because of the FDA's 
black-box warning that antidepressants can cause suicide attempts. The studies in this issue 
provide more evidence that this side effect is rare, compared to the overall decrease in suicide 
attempts that occurs when treatment is initiated. Furthermore, suicide attempts in the first month 
of treatment occur regardless of whether the treatment is psychotherapy or drug therapy, which 
suggests that these attempts are part of the natural evolution of symptoms in depression itself."    

Both studies were funded by grants from the National Institute of Mental Health. Additional 
financial disclosures appear at the end of the article.    
 About the American Journal of Psychiatry    

The  American Journal of Psychiatry , the official journal of the American Psychiatric Association, publishes a monthly 
issue with scientific articles submitted by psychiatrists and other scientists worldwide. The peer review and editing 
process is conducted independently of any other American Psychiatric Association components. Therefore, statements 
in this press release or the articles in the Journal are not official policy statements of the American Psychiatric 
Association. The Journal's editorial policies conform to the Uniform Requirements of the International Committee of 
Medical Journal Editors, of which it is a member. For further information about the Journal visit 
 http://www.ajp.psychiatryonline.org .    
 About the American Psychiatric Association    

The American Psychiatric Association is a national medical specialty society whose more than 38,000 physician 
members specialize in diagnosis, treatment, prevention and research of mental illnesses including substance use 
disorders. Visit the APA at  http://www.psych.org  and  http://www.HealthyMinds.org .  