




Surviving  cancer  in childhood can lead to health problems later in life, according to a study.    
Researchers found nearly half go on to develop at least one fairly significant health problem linked to their cancer, or its treatment. 
   
A team from UT Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas examined the medical records of nearly 10,000 childhood cancer survivors. 
   
Their work is published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. 
   
The researchers also found that girls were 40% more likely than boys to suffer long-term problems. 
   
Long-term effects of therapy can include secondary cancers, heart and lung disease,  infertility ,  obesity ,  hypertension  and disruption of the hormone system. 
   
Almost 20% of survivors showed signs of psychological distress. 
   
The researchers hope their work will lead to improved monitoring of cancer survivors as they grow older. 
   
Survival rates for childhood cancer are now approaching 80% - meaning that many more people go on to adulthood. 
   
Damage 
   
Researcher Professor Kevin Oeffinger said: 'Virtually all organ systems can be affected by radiation,  chemotherapy  or surgery, leading to a wide array of potential effects later in life. 
   
'This study tells us that children who survive cancer need to be periodically evaluated for the rest of their lives. 
   
'We hope physicians become more aware of the risks and are cognizant of the problems survivors face.' 
   
The study focused on cancer survivors who were treated between 1970 and 1986 and were 21 years of age or younger at the time of their diagnosis. 
   
Professor George Buchanan, who also worked on the study, said many of the long-term effects from modern cancer therapy are subtler than side effects seen years ago. 
   
'It used to be in the old days that physicians were simply gratified to see their young cancer patients survive, but as the patients started living longer we began to see side effects from the new therapies that were helping them live. 
   
'And we've only had modern cancer therapy for the last 30 years, meaning we're still learning about these side effects every day.' 