




Physical symptoms (such as  headache ,  back pain , stomach problems, joint or muscle pains, and dizziness) are nearly as common in  depression  as emotional symptoms and are the predominant complaint depressed patients present with in the primary care setting.    
A study published in the Journal of General Internal Medicine examined the prevalence, impact on quality of life, and outcome of physical symptoms in depressed patients during nine months of  antidepressant  therapy. While physical symptoms showed, on average, some improvement with antidepressant treatment, the improvement was typically less than for emotional symptoms. The physical symptoms showed the greatest improvement during the initial month of treatment.    

In contrast, depression continued to show gradual improvements over the 9-month period. Unlike depression, however, improvement in physical symptoms typically plateaus with minimal resolution in subsequent months.    

Therefore, it is important to recognize the physical symptoms that commonly co-exist with depression and, if they fail to improve during the first month of treatment, to consider additional therapies. Corresponding author, Dr. Kroenke states, \"It is important to ask patients with depression about physical symptoms at the start of treatment and when assessing improvement ask about physical as well as emotional symptoms.\"    

About the Author Kurt Kroenke, M.D. is Professor of Medicine in the Division of General Internal Medicine and Geriatrics at Indiana University, and a Research Scientist in the Regenstrief Institute where he is Director of Fellowship Training. He is also Director of the Master of Science in Clinical Research degree program offered by the Indiana University Graduate School and has over 200 publications. Dr. Kroenke is available for questions and interviews and can be reached at kkroenke@regenstrief.org or 317-630-7447.    

Media wishing to receive PDFs of these articles please contact   medicalnews@bos.blackwellpublishing.net.    

About the Journal of General Internal Medicine The Journal of General Internal Medicine (JGIM) is the official scientific publication of the Society of General Internal Medicine, whose mission is to promote improved patient care, research, and education in primary care and general internal medicine. JGIM articles focus on topics such as clinical research, curriculum development, epidemiology, prevention, and health care delivery in general internal medicine.    

About Blackwell Publishing Blackwell Publishing is the world\'s leading society publisher. The company remains independent with over 900 staff members in offices in the US, UK, Australia, China, Denmark, Germany, and Japan. Blackwell publishes over 700 journals in partnership with more than 550 academic and professional societies.   

Contact: Sharon Agsalda  
medicalnews@bos.blackwellpublishing.net  
781-388-8507  
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 